Sovereign means God is the supreme ruler. He has set rules and boundaries and has determined blessings for obedience and consequences for disobedience. He interacts with His creation. Prayer, repentance, humbling ourselves can all have an impact and Scripture shows that God has changed His mind when His people pray and humble themselves.
2 Chronicles 7:14 CSB — and my people, who bear my name, humble themselves, pray and seek my face, and turn from their evil ways, then I will hear from heaven, forgive their sin, and heal their land."


I would submit to you that God is not in control of everything. Please let me explain before you jump to any conclusions. This is a VERY important concept to understand be cause it shapes our perception of who God is.

God is love. You cannot have true love without freedom. Freedom and "control" are not synonyms. Love and control are not synonyms. I cannot put a gun to your head and make you love me, love is a choice. 

Remember God is the one on trial in this whole great controversy between good and evil. The angles and un fallen worlds are watching to see if Satans accusations about God are true or not. Is God a "controlling" God who in the end doesn't really give us free choice? Or is He a God who just knows that His ways are the best ways for us if we will only "choose" them. 

Don't get me wrong, I believe that God "has" the power to control everything, but because He is a God who IS love He does not exercise that power; therefor He does not control everything. According to 1 John 5:19 this world is in the control of the "Evil one". 

If God is "controlling" everything, and everything that happens "happens for a reason" than rape & child molestation are Gods will! Sick thought isn't it! And that is definitely going to affect our perception of God, - in a bad way (which accomplishes Satans purposes) Because, it is when we see God for who He really is, that we fall in love with Him and "surrender" to Him ourselves. 

Where does prayer come into all this? That is a topic that is grossly confused & unclear in many peoples minds. It is also a deep and intricut topic that an "oversimplified" answer cannot, well, answer. Simply put though, I believe that when we pray to God earnestly and sincerely, it shows, to everyone, (unseen angles, Devil, etc) that we are exercising our free choice, and that by answering our prayer God is not violating our free choice. 

There is also a battle going on remember. And if God were to exercise His power and overcome the enemy "just cause" than He would not be a God of love! As hard of a concept as that is to wrap our heads around. Because remember, control is virtually the opposite of love.
